Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode. And today
I have here is a very special guest, Doctor
Richard Wolf. He's professor of Economics Emeritus at the
University of Massachusetts Amherst. And today, we're talking about
socialism and Marxism, perhaps trying to tackle some common
misconceptions about them. So, Doctor Wolf, welcome to the
show. It's an honor to everyone.
Thank you very much, Ricardo. I'm very glad to
be here. So,
as I said at the beginning, uh, um, we're
going to talk about socialism and Marxism. I would
like to start with socialism and as we do
so, I would like to also perhaps try to
tackle some common misconceptions about it and Marxism later
on. So, how would you characterize socialism? What are
its main tenants?
Socialism has meant different things to different people at
different moments in now a history that is 2
centuries old. Uh, THE reality is it begins to
be a common idea, a common name, early in
the 19th century, becoming more and more important across
the 19th, then across the 20th century. It spread
from Europe, where it began to now being uh
a movement of sorts that is global. So, as
movements of human beings go, it is one of
the more successful. It has grown to a global
institution in a very short historical time. And of
course, any idea, any tradition that grows so quickly
across so many different societies will show differences in
one place from another, in one century from another.
To expect socialism to have one definition all the
time is silly. It means you don't understand how
human thinking evolves. Having said that, let's go through
briefly what is common to the different approaches and
how they differ. The most common basic impulse behind
socialism is really very simple to express. It's the
idea that we as human beings can do better
than capitalism. Capitalism is what we have. Capitalism is
what we know. Capitalism also grew. Over the last
4 or 5 centuries. It's older than socialism. Why?
Because socialism is a reaction against capitalism. It is
capitalism's self-criticism. And so it has evolved with capitalism.
I make a joke for people to understand this
idea by saying nothing better guarantees the future of
socialism than capitalism. As long as we have capitalism,
it will continue to provoke and to create and
to recreate socialism. Even if you look at the
20th century's efforts to destroy, literally, to kill and
imprison and persecute socialists and communists of all kinds,
whether Hitler in Germany or Mussolini or Salazar, or
Franco, any of them. They went to enormous lengths
in Spain, they had a civil war, etc. It
didn't work. Socialism came right back as we knew
it would because they instituted capitalism, and that always
provokes in people. It's a little bit this way.
In slavery, eventually the slaves said we can't stand
this anymore. We can do better as a society
than slavery, and they did. And in feudalism, the
serfs did better than feudalism, and eventually they did.
In capitalism, it's the employee class, the working class,
which has the idea we can do better, and
I am personally quite convinced that they will. So
that's what all socialists more or less can agree
to, that we can do better than Capitalism. After
that, what they mean by better varies, and I,
I don't have time to give you the many
different forms it takes, but I'm gonna give you
two or three of the major ones. So, one
idea of socialism, the one you will find in
much of Western Europe and beyond, is the idea
that socialism is when the working class takes power.
Usually through a parliamentary voting, but sometimes by revolution,
the government takes power and regulates and controls private
capitalists. So they must pay a certain level of
wages. They cannot do what they want with workers.
They have to make employment secure. They have to
provide a national health for everybody, a health insurance.
They um must give workers so many weeks of
paid vacation every year. In other words, it is
what we sometimes call capitalism with a human face.
And that's the position of most socialist parties in
Western Europe. That's what the German Socialist Party does,
that's what the Italians did, that's what the French
do, etc. ETC. ETC. Labour Party, uh, in England.
That's one kind of socialism. There is nobody who
issues a permission to use the name socialism. Anybody
watching this program one day can wake up and
say, I'm a socialist, and that's perfectly all right.
There is no, you don't have to have a
license, no permit, no nothing, OK. Here's a second
kind of socialism. In the second kind of socialism,
associated mostly with the Soviet Union in the 20th
century, The government not only regulates and controls, but
it takes a further step. It owns and operates
enterprises, industrial enterprises, agricultural enterprises. The government, instead of
regulating, takes ownership. It allows the government, of course,
to control much more than it would if it
were in the Western European model of a government
that merely regulates, but leaves the enterprise in the
hands of the private capitalists. So the Soviet Union
had another kind of socialism. By the way, here
in America, Americans whose um political literacy is, I'll
try to be polite now, quite limited. Uh, THEY,
they look upon the Soviet Union as a communist
country, and, and, and people in, in Europe do
that too. That's of course a mistake. The Soviet
Union never claimed that it was a communist country.
It had a communist party, but lots of countries
have that. What the Communist Party had done was
to establish Soviet socialism and communism maybe they could
get to in the future. To call that society
communist means either you're ignorant or you have some
political motivation in making this confusion, but we don't
have to be confused here. That's another kind of
socialism. Alright, here's now a 3rd kind, that's very
important in the world today. The example here is
the People's Republic of China. That is a hybrid
of the first two. It's a country that is
roughly half government regulated private capitalist enterprises. And the
other half, Soviet style government ownership and operation of
enterprises. So it's half the one kind of socialism,
half the other, and that makes it a yet
another variety of what socialism can mean. And the
Chinese call what they have socialism with Chinese characteristics.
Well, the big characteristic is this hybrid, this 50/50
split between the two others. Finally, there is a
whole another tradition within socialism. That is critical of
the 1st 3, the Western European, the Soviet, and
the Chinese. The criticism here goes like this. You
have made many changes that are improvements on capitalism,
but You have not, or at least not yet,
transformed the workplace, the actual factory or office or
store where people come together to do work of
one kind or another. And we socialists, these folks
say, for us, socialism beyond whatever you do in
terms of government and private, has to include the
transformation of the workplace. And what do they mean?
They mean the democratization of the workplace. So that
no longer do a small group of people, the
owner of the enterprise, the board of directors in
the corporation, a tiny group of people no longer
have the power to decide. What gets produced, what
technology is used, where the production happens, and what
is done with the product. That now has to
become democratized and we socialists, this fourth kind, that's
our primary focus now. We want to transform. From
the hierarchical capitalist organization of production to a democratic
socialist form. Those are the four major, and each
of them has variations, but that's what socialism in
today's world is all about, and it means that
socialists are busy fighting for one or the other
or combinations of these four basic varieties.
So let me ask you, since at a certain
point you mentioned Soviet Russia and I also would
like to have Mao's China to the picture here.
So what impact do you think that Soviet Russia
and Mao's China have on how people look at
socialism and communism, even people on the left?
Well, it, it, the first answer to your question
is it depends on what information about the Soviet
Union and Mao they got, who provided the information,
because we've been in a Cold War, let's call
it, uh, for the entire history of modern socialism,
uh. Let's remember, inside capitalism, socialism has been persecuted,
hounded, killed, imprisoned, and it's not as though we've
had a conversation that's polite and OK. Occasionally there
have been small periods of time in one country
or another where you could actually have an honest
conversation between pro and anti-socialists, and they could argue
and make their argument, that does happen. But most
of the time, there's an enormous overlay of propaganda.
It's mostly anti-socialist propaganda, but at least in the
Soviet Union and China, you have a little bit
the other way, propaganda going in the opposite direction.
Anyway, to answer your question as best I can,
the Soviet Union was the first major country. To
be captured politically by a socialist political movement. That
had not happened before. The closest thing was a
few weeks in 1871 when you had something called
the Paris Commune, in Paris, France. And that was
the model, if you know the history, that was
the model that Lenin and others in the leadership
of the Bolshevik Party in Russia, they used the
essays Marx had written because Marx was alive at
the time of the Paris commune, and his people
participated in that commune, so he knew very well
what happened there. Lenin studied all of that writing.
So the Russians were the first nation to try
to build a socialist economy. Now what that means
is they didn't have any model other than the
few weeks of the Paris commune, and that wasn't
that much of a model because they didn't have
a chance to do very much before the French
army came in and by the way, killed large
numbers of the people who led the Paris commune.
You can see their monuments in the Pere Lachaise
uh cemetery in Paris to this day. So, What
I would say to people is, the first thing
you should understand is that the Russians were an
experiment. They had no blueprints. They didn't have any
clear idea of what they should do. After the
revolution succeeds in 1917, they immediately plunge into a
civil war. Into a war against foreign armies coming
in to undo the revolution. France, Britain, Japan, and
the United States landed troops in Russia to defeat
the new socialist government. And there was still the
leftover of World War One, because that had been,
uh, Russia had been involved and had suffered enormous
damage in the war. So here is an experiment
that has to cope with a World War, with
a revolution, with a civil war, and a foreign
invasion. They did the best they could. The major
achievement was to survive. They were able to survive.
They won the Civil War, they pushed out the
foreign invaders. They signed a treaty to leave World
War One. It's amazing what they accomplished. But they
were just the first experiment. So they made lots
of mistakes. That's what the first experiment in everything
does, whether it's in a laboratory or from a
scientist, or it's a social experiment, or it's a
personal experiment, you are learning as you are going.
So, the history of the Soviet Union teaches the
broader socialist movement. Things to do that work, and
things not to do because they fail. And you
need, if you're honest, to draw the lesson from
the Soviet Union, what to build on and what
to avoid. And that's what socialists have done. They've
tried to build on, but also to avoid. And
they've done a perfectly reasonable job. Eastern Europe, that's
a product of World War II, because the Germans
and the Russians fought that war, the Russians wanted
a uh a stripe of countries from the Baltic
states in the north to Bulgaria in the south,
to be a kind of a buffer between Russia
and Western Europe. The same issue that now produces
the Ukraine war, same issue of the security of
Russia relative to the danger they feel from Western
Europe, which they should. Let me remind everyone, after
the Russian Revolution, the French, the British, the Japanese,
and the Americans landed troops in those countries. To
overthrow the government. Russia never sent any troops to
any of those countries to overthrow their governments. There's
no comparison here. And if you didn't know that,
shame on you. That you should know, that's a
fact you can verify in any history book you
want. OK. Capitalism, while all this is going on,
provoked socialists in other countries, in Cuba, in Korea,
in China, in Vietnam, and I could go on.
But in those that I listed, they too then
made efforts to go beyond the capitalism. And what
did they do? They learned from the experience of
the Soviet Union. Up until 1989, they got help
from the Soviet Union, as well as advice and
as well as lessons. After the collapse of the
Soviet Union, around 1989, 1990, these societies had to
develop on their own, and they have now made
further developments and experiments. In the early years of
the Chinese revolution, The big uniqueness of China. WAS
gathered around the figure of Mao Zedong, their most
important leader. He had had his own idea of
how to make a Soviet style revolution in China.
And one of the big differences was in Russia,
in the Soviet Union, the revolution was concentrated in
the small urban industrial center of Russia. For Mao,
China didn't have that. So he built his revolution
in the rural agricultural portions, interior portions of China.
He was driven out. Of Shanghai and those other
cities by the right wing pro-capitalist Chiang Kai-shek government
of China. Hounded by them, arrested by them, many
people killed by them. So he went into the
interior and developed a communistic organization of the peasantry
and built an army out of that. And then
he fought a civil war. With the pro-capitalists between
1945, the end of World War II, and 1949,
4 years of a brutal civil war which Mao
Tse-tung and the Communist Party of China won. And
Chiang Kai-shek, the defeated, retreated to the island of
Taiwan where they still are. What did Mao do?
He wanted to build on his notion of communes.
So, already in the 1950s, the first decade after
the Civil War, he tried to organize communes, and
in the 1950s and 1960s, China was transformed around
this experiment. Of communes, and the decision was made
that they weren't ready. That the experience of the
communes was such that they had to first develop
China's Economy, have an industrial base, have modern technology,
and then they could go back and try to
create a modern industrial commune organization, but they had
to give it up. That that's the biggest lesson.
That Mao left. After he died, and so the
the the leaders of China. In fact, quite Maoist.
In their ideas, went to work to build China's
modern industry, starting in the 1970s. And now here's
a fact. A fact. Starting to count looking say
since 1975. China has developed a modern economy. Further
and faster than any country on this planet. Nobody
has achieved in these few years, 40 years, more
or less. No one has achieved what they have
achieved. They are now the great competitor and the
great challenger of the United States, which has been
operating a global empire for the last century. And
they are now the new face. Of socialism. They're
not the only socialism. I've been through that with
you, but they are proof that they have learned
that if you, if your goal in life is
to develop a modern economy, to escape poverty, to
become a powerful nation state. Then China is the
way to do that, because nobody has come close
to achieving that amount of growth in so short
a historical period. And I'm sure that future. Efforts
of socialism now have The strengths and weaknesses, the
achievements and mistakes of the Soviet Union to build
on, but likewise, the mistakes and achievements of China,
and you can see it in, for example, the
remarkable economic success of Vietnam. Which is the one
who has in the most creative way, tried to
use those lessons. You see it also elsewhere, but
Vietnam has not suffered. The blockades, the sanctions, and
the overt hostility of the United States. The United
States still wants to somehow Take advantage of Vietnam.
It doesn't care about North Korea and Cuba and
so subjects them to every kind of negative pressure,
which has its impact.
So with all of that in mind, let me
ask you then, how do you react to claims
still made by many, many people when they say
that wherever socialism has been tried, it always failed.
Yeah, this is an this is ignorance, and it's
an ignorance that keeps being repeated, so that people
who don't take it 10 minutes, that's all it
takes, 10 minutes to find out the facts. They
avoid spending that 10 minutes and instead tell each
other these sorts of things. I am in, I
am in debates here in the, I'm, I've been
talking to you from New York City, so I'm
in the middle of the financial core of this
country, the government of this country is much more
here than in Washington, right so it's here is
where it is, and I live here and I
work here. And I therefore engage in debates, the
public, at the university and trade unions in which
people say what you just said. So I know
you are correct, lots of people say things like
that, uh, but that's ignorance. You know what they
have they have in their mind after I, I
give them my answer, they will start talking to
me about Venezuela. Yes. Oh, they get very excited
about Venezuela, and then some of them, uh, mentioned
Cuba. I, I assume that's because those two economies
have enormous difficulties. But that has very little to
do with socialism. That has to do with a,
that they were either actual or they were in
fact colonies of the United States, and then they
were enemies of the United States, very little between.
During their colonial period, they became very poor, as
most colonies do, because they were exploited by the
United States. After they broke away Cuba in the
revolution with Fidel Castro uh in 1950. Venezuela much
later with Hugo Chavez and so on, then they
were subject to total blockades in which they couldn't
sell their product, they couldn't buy anything, they, I
mean. Here's the joke. If you wanted to come
up with a balance sheet for socialism, I'm willing
to think about that, then we would have to
look at Cuba and Venezuela, fine, but we'd also
have to look at Vietnam and China also. And
then you would see that clearly socialism isn't the
problem, because socialism is what they have in Vietnam
and China, and those are two models of successful
industrialization. I mean, let, let me be really clear
with you. In the 100 years that the United
States has been the dominant economic power in the
world. Roughly from the 1920s, 1930s to now, a
century. The United States Empire was dominant. The United
States Empire had no competitor. Now, the United States
for the first time in a century, has a
serious competitor. And that competitor is the People's Republic
of China, which calls itself socialism with Chinese characteristics.
OK. No one expected this, no one foresaw this.
China was not very many decades ago, the poorest
country on earth. And it is now the technological
equivalent of the United States. That this is unbelievable.
If your goal in life is to become less
poor, to become a modern society, which is the
goal of the vast majority of the nations of
the world right now, in Asia, Africa, Latin America,
and beyond. If that's your goal, then China is
the number one success story in the world. So
to repeat, oh socialism never works. You know, if
a student does that in a class, you call
the student up and say, either you're not reading
the material that we give you to study. Or
there's something wrong with you, but you gotta get
some help, because you keep repeating what is know
that and you have no evidence. Give me evidence.
Evidence is not Cuba and Venezuela. Whatever you think
about those societies, that's not enough evidence. You have
to talk about China and Vietnam, which you never
do. Those folks who say that do not, or
here's another one you may encounter. They will say
grudgingly when I point out China. Yeah, that's because
China has adopted capitalism. And then then I go,
then I, you know, then I say, OK, well.
Who who authorizes the use of this term? You
just decided that since China is a great success,
you're gonna call it capitalist, but that that that's
a legalism, that's the kind of thing a lawyer
does in a in a in a jury, hoping
the jury doesn't notice. You can call it whatever
you want. They call it socialism, I call it
socialism. The whole world calls it socialism. You want
to call it something else because you've been embarrassed.
That the statement you make, socialism never works, turns
out it works real well, and now you don't
know what to say, so you'll say, oh, it
isn't socialism. It's a little bit like um Mr.
Trump reacting to Kamala Harris as his opponent by
saying, oh, she's not really black. Oh what? Where'd
you get this? He made that up. He makes
most things up. He, he, he's not bound by
any rules of, of factuality.
Well, maybe I will ask you a little bit
about Trump since we, the results of the elections
are already out toward the end of our conversation.
But let me just ask you now, since we've
been talking a lot about socialism, what is Marxism
then? And does it relate to socialism and if
so in what way?
Yes, good. Socialism is older than Marx. When Marx
was a young man, there already was in the
world, socialism. And given Marx's own position as a
critic of capitalism, he found his way to the
literature about socialism. He found it in the library,
he found the people that he bumped into, you
know, he was an academic, he went to the
university, he got a degree in philosophy, and he
began his working life as a teacher. So he
encountered other teachers and students, and they Made him
familiar with the literature of socialism. Uh, SO he,
he read that literature and he found it. On
the one hand, very persuasive. So he began referring
to himself as a socialist. But he also found
Himself disagreeing with a whole bunch of things in
the socialist tradition that he encountered. So he began
to develop his own way of understanding socialism. He
did, like I said before, he took what he
felt were a valid, powerful insights from that tradition,
and he was grateful for them. But he also
took it in his own direction. He developed it
in a particular way. And that's what Marxism is.
It's one strain of thinking within the broader socialism.
There have always been socialists who are not Marxists.
There are different kinds of socialists. Some of them
take a lot from Marx. And mix it with
other things. Some take only a little from Marx,
some take nothing at all. So you have the
whole range of of attitude, but Marxism is a
particular Analytic, an idea. Marx's goal was to explain.
Why capitalism worked the way it did. And why
the workings of capitalism. Explain what for Marx was
the great question of his lifetime. And let me
tell you what that question was. OK. Marx was
born in 1818. Which means he was born into
the Europe whose transformation was underway, and for whom
the great event that provoked their transformation was the
French Revolution. The overthrow of the feudal monarchy of
Louis Catos and all the others. And the establishment
instead of capitalism. In place of feudalism. And the
great slogans of the French Revolution, liberte, egalite, fraternite,
that these were for Marx, his own beliefs. This
was what he was a a a child of
the French Revolution. He wanted there to be liberty,
equality, fraternity, and he added from the American Revolution
at about the same time, democracy, that these were
his values. So the great question at his time.
When he becomes an adult, it's now 1850, more
or less, middle of the 19th century, he becomes
an adult, goes to the university. He looks around.
Germany and France at that time, I mean he
comes from the border uh between France and Germany.
Uh, HE looks at that and he says, we
have capitalism, feudalism is gone. But do we have
liberty, equality, fraternity, and democracy? Not at all. So
here's the question. The people who made the French
Revolution, Bob Spierre, Danton, all of the great leaders
of the French Revolution, they promised liberty, equality, fraternity,
and democracy. Those were the, the banners in the
in the streets of Paris. What happened, Marx said,
We got the capitalism, but we didn't get the
liberty equality fraternity. Capitalists are rich, proletarians are poor.
Capitalists have freedom, the working class has none. Democracy,
the workers do not elect in any way or
participate in any way in deciding who their exploiter
is. OK, so what, what happened? And the results
of Marx's work were to demonstrate. It took him
years, but to demonstrate to all of us that
the reason capitalism failed to bring anywhere ever liberty,
equality, fraternity, and democracy. It is because capitalism itself
is the obstacle to doing that, that the way
capitalism is organized prevents liberty, equality, and fraternity. You
don't have to look outside, you don't have to
look for a special reason. It's right here, inside
the guts of capitalism that you have the obstacle
to liberty, equality. And the way to put that
in, in simple English. Slavery is the dichotomy of
master and slave. Feudalism is the dichotomy of lord
and serf, and capitalism is the dichotomy of employer
and employee. That's the problem. You have to overcome
that, or else you're not gonna get liberty, equality,
fraternity, and democracy. Mary's project is to show that.
And Marx's goal is to inform the working class
that wants and needs liberty, equality, fraternity, and democracy,
that the way to get it is to go
beyond capitalism. Mhm.
So, what would you say are the most recurring
problems of capitalism, the ones that seem to keep
coming back over and over again?
Yes, and those are the ones that keep provoking
socialism. I would argue that there are 3. I
mean, there are many, but I'm gonna give you
the 3 main ones. OK. The the first is
the tendency of capitalism, wherever it comes to exist.
To worsen the inequality of wealth and income. Among
people. If you take a look, uh, I'm not,
I don't know if you're familiar. There's a French
economist named, uh, Thomas Piketty who works in I'm
aware of him. Yes, OK. Well, his is only
the latest. In a long series of works that
show this. If you look at his book called
Capital Capital in the 21st Century, it is, you
know, 600 pages demonstrating that wherever capitalism goes, the
the the the gap between rich and poor gets
worse. So, that's a terrible quality of capitalism. It
is not only not bringing us equality, it is
bringing us the opposite. And what periodically happens is
it goes so far that it provokes a revolution
which temporarily narrows the gap between rich and poor,
and then when the revolution is over, if it
lets capitalism survive, the capitalism will once again produce
the we are that now. 40 years ago, the
United States was less unequal than most of the
countries in Europe. Today, the United States is more
unequal than most of the countries in Europe. What's
that about? Capital has been more dynamic in the
United States than in Europe, and so it got
worse, and we are now very extreme. We are
so extreme now that I would not be surprised,
especially now with Mr. Trump, that we begin to
have very serious social explosions because of the gap
between rich and poor inside the United States. So
that's the first one. The second problem of capitalism
is a profound Instability. This is a system that
goes from recession to inflation back to recession, more
unemployment, less unemployment. No one escapes, no one. The
business cycle, the crisis, the recession, the depression, the
boom, the bust, the crash. I mean, we have
endless words because this is always with us. Wherever
capitalism goes, it produces this business cycle. In which
workers now have to struggle not just with low
wages, but with the risk that 2 years from
now or 4 years from now, I won't have
a job. How do I buy a house paying
every month for my mortgage? If I, if I'm
gonna lose my job, I won't be able to
pay the mortgage. I'll lose my house. I'll lose
my apartment. You know, students drop out of university
because suddenly their family doesn't have the money cause
father or mother lost the job, etc. THE, the
instability is terrible. Capitalism has tried for centuries to
stop the instability. We even have a Branch of
modern economics called Keynesian economics after the British economist
who devoted himself to understanding why is this happening
and what can we do about it. And now
we have monetary policy and fiscal policy. We have
wonderful policies. Do they prevent the instability? Not at
all. Not at all. The, the two worst collapses,
the three worst, 1929, the Great Depression. 2008, we
call that in this country the Great Recession, and
then 2020, which we call the pandemic recession, but
I mean, it, it doesn't matter. We have collapses,
and then we have inflations, and then we have
collapse it's that instability is a terrible problem for
capitalism, which, like inequality, it has never been able
to stop or to solve. And the 3rd 1.
IS the built-in expansion of capitalism. Capitalists have to
take their profits. Either entirely or in the major
parts of it, and plow them back into production,
because otherwise they risk being competed out of existence.
They have to get the new machine. They have
to produce the next successful commodity. They're always expanding,
which means they have to go around the world
to get inputs. For their expansion, and they have
to go around the world to find markets for
their expansion. They are forever bumping into each other
or bumping into local societies who they want to
serve them. That's why we have colonialism, and now
that the mass of people won't allow colonialism, are
fighting back, that's why we don't have Britain in
India. That's why we do have Israel in Gaza,
they're still trying to do it. OK, that produces
war, endless war, large war, little war. The worst
wars in human history, World War 1 and 2
were fought among expanding capitalist economies, Germany, Britain, United
States, Japan. And at the beginning of World War
One, Russia, which had its capitalist too. So it
seems to me that the great, the three great
flaws of capitalism are inequality, instability, and a tendency
to global warfare that constantly destabilizes everybody.
And so, how do you look at the current
state of support for socialism, particularly in the West
and in capitalist societies? Because it seems to me
that since the 2008 economic crisis and now also
more recently, as you mentioned, the pandemic crisis, people
have been looking, uh, have been moving to. Uh,
MORE fascist, more right-wing populist narratives instead of alternatives
based of, of more leftist alternatives based on socialism
or some other related uh positions in, in the
left wing uh aspect of the political divide. So
how do you look at it?
Here's the way I look at it. Capitalism, because
of its flaws. Provokes Opposition, it always has. And
it knows that the people who run capitalist societies,
they're not stupid. They, they learned from their parents
and their grandparents that They have different explanations than
I do, but they know that there's a risk.
When the forces on the right are very strong,
They make alliances with the left. When the forces
on the left seem strong, they make alliances on
the right. They don't care. For them, the issue
is not left and right, which they disagree with
all of that. They are there to keep the
capitalist system going. So, for example, When fascism grew
in the 1930s, I didn't find it. I mean,
I wasn't alive then, but as I look back,
I don't find this surprising because In 1917, the
Russian revolution gave to the capitalists of the world
a fantastic shock. Up until then, no socialists had
been more than an annoying politician who was critical.
But now they captured a government. Now they had
a big country, Russia, that they were in charge
of, so they felt terribly threatened. That's why they
sent those troops that I talked about before. That's
why they aided the white army to try to
overthrow uh Lenin, Trotsky, Stalin, and the others. Mhm.
So they convinced their people very quickly, starting in
1917, and without interruption. Through the 1920s, in every
Western country, there was anti-leftist propaganda from the top
to the bottom. Bolsheviks, that was the bad word
then. The Bolsheviks are coming. The Bolsheviks threaten you.
In Portugal and Spain, everywhere you had it. So
when capitalism then collapsed in the Great Depression, starting
in October of 1929. The mass of people realized
that the capitalist system that was running their societies
had broken down. It was obvious, millions were out
of work, the government didn't function, so they went
to the right because they had been taught for
15 years or more that the left is evil,
terrible, don't go there. So they went to the
right. The capitalists, in some cases, went with them.
Italy, Germany. Spain, Portugal, them. But most capitalists said,
oh no, oh no, we have to go to
the left, make an alliance with the working class
against the fascists. So that's what you got. That's
why the government in Spain invites the international brigades
to help them fight against Franco. That's why the
French vote into office Leon Bloom in the middle
of the 1930s, a socialist for the first time,
a socialist prime minister in France. That's why in
World War II, Britain, France, and most of Europe
allies with the Soviet Union, the arch enemy, they
went and allied. Here in the United States, people
who were known socialists and communists were given high
government positions. In World War II, so alliance with
the right to uh to the left to destroy
the right. The minute the right is destroyed, end
of World War 2, 1945, the minute. The complete
switch around and the Soviet Union, which was your
ally, becomes the evil enemy, and we have the
Cold War ever since, so that answers your question.
Now that capitalism is falling apart again. The people
at first go to the, go to the right,
because that's the allowable place. An American worker will
go to the right because he's afraid the left
is somehow evil and terrible and dangerous. But here's
why I'm confident. Here's why I don't have a
long face. The right wing, for example, Mr. Trump,
in his 1st 4 years, he solved exactly no
problem of the United States. Our sit, we are
more unequal now than we were before. We are
more unstable than we were before, and our empire
is disintegrating. There's nothing he can do about that.
He is going to be the president of a
further decline. And I predict to you, you and
I should talk, 4 years from now, they will
blow him out of the water the way they
just blew Biden and Harris out of the water.
And why? Because the mass of the working class
will go, gee, this guy hasn't done anything. That's
why they didn't vote for him 4 years ago.
That's why Biden got elected. It wasn't that Biden
was no great leader. Mr. Biden has been a
politician here for 50 years, and nobody paid him
any attention. He comes from a small state, he's
irrelevant, but he was able to beat Mr. Trump
because even then, large numbers of people said nothing.
Now Mr. Trump cleverly, to his credit, turned himself
into a folk hero. And that way he begins
to express. The anger that the mass of the
working class feels towards this whole capitalist system. He
looks like an acceptable outside critic. You know, he,
the problem is immigrants, immigrants. Immigrants make no difference
at all. That is it. We are a country
of 330 million people, and we have between 10
and 11 million undocumented immigrants. There is no way
that 10 to 11 million people, among the poorest
in the world coming to a rich country like
this could be the cause of the economic problems
of American capitalism. That is ridiculous. There's no way
to do, no way to show that, nobody has,
but by making a wall, it's very dramatic. It's
all a big wall, people, 00, he's doing something.
And he's gonna put a tariff on everything. He's
doing something. Compared to that, the the Democrats look
like same old, same old, everything is, uh, and
that's no longer acceptable because the system is falling
down. The United States lost the war in Vietnam.
The United States lost the war in Afghanistan. The
United States lost the war in Iraq, and it
is now losing the war in Ukraine. Everybody knows,
everybody knows, they dare not speak it, but they
all know.
OK, so as a last question, let me ask
you then more directly about Donald Trump because as
you were already alluding to, we already know the
results of the presidential elections in the US and
Donald Trump won the second term. So what do
you think that 4 more years of Donald Trump
represents for the average American and perhaps for the
rest of the world?
Um, NOTHING going on in the rest of the
world. Matters here. That is The American people Having
been the dominant empire in the world. For a
century See the rest of the world. As somewhere
between irrelevant. And easily manageable. And they don't care.
Uh THEY'RE split between the Democrats who are convinced
they can manage everything and the Republicans who say
we're not gonna worry about managing it because we
don't care what happens. We are sober for one
group. We are so big, we don't have to
worry. For the other group, we are so big,
we can take care of everything. So, you will
get a mixture of those two perspectives. A little
less management and a little bit more disengagement. If
I, if, if I was. If you were to
ask me this question, What does it mean for
Western Europe? I mean, that's where the impact will
be the greatest. Because you have a series of
governments. In most of the car, not all, but
in most. That have allied themselves with the United
States. And they are now going to be allied
to someone who will be perfectly happy to throw
them into the ocean. Doesn't care. Doesn't care what
happens to Mr. Starmer. Or to Macron, or to
you doesn't, doesn't care, don't you. The issue is
China and Russia and BRICS, and we don't. If
the Chinese offer Interesting deals. To the United States.
By dividing between them, Europe. They'll do it. And
the Europeans will have absolutely nothing to say about
it. So if I were a leader who had
identified myself. With the United States, say around the
war in Ukraine. I would worry. You're done. You
just lost You you hooked yourself to a ship
that is now sinking as we speak. They ought
to worry, they ought to be looking for another
job. They ought to move maybe to China. So
I think what he'll do is a variety of
economic acts that will backfire on him. And that
the business community will come down on him. And
he will, he will then be defeated. One way
or another. Either the business class will get rid
of him. Or the military will get rid of
him. Because they're working with the business class, and
he's just too strange. And the irony is the
Europeans are going to try to find Americans to
work with and for for Trump and his people,
that will be dangerous, and they will destroy those
people at home, and those people in Europe for
making even the effort to do this. You're not
dealing with any, he can't run again. He's already
he is already a lame duck, we call that,
because he's had one, you only can have 2.
Unless he changes the law, which it would be
difficult for him, you know, you may do that.
But you're also going to see now major upsets
in the United States. If he, for example, Blocks
access to abortion, you're going to have a revolution
here of the women. They didn't vote for him
anyway, but they are now, you know, you, you
cannot do what he wants to do. Or I
could be wrong. I could be wrong, and maybe
he can mobilize well enough. And then there will
be an exodus from here. An exodus of Left-wing
people, intellectuals, feminists, anti-racists, by the millions. And you
will have a wave of immigration. To Europe as
big or bigger than the one that left Europe
because of the Nazis and Mussolini and all of
that.
But we were talking just about this off record
and just quickly, when it comes to the potential
resurgence of fascism, of course, as you know, I
come from Portugal and My grandparents and even my
parents a little bit went through the later stages
at least of the almost 50 years of Salazar's
regime here in Portugal. So do you think that
Trump, or, or the, the second election of Trump
also has something to tell us about that or
not?
Not so much about that because we don't have
that experience, you know, in the 1930s when when
you had the Salazar and Franco and all the
rest of it, the American working class went to
the left. Roosevelt here introduced, you know, very high
in Roosevelt's government were socialists and communists and all
of that. They were considered more reliable as opponents
of fascism. So you had the movement to the
right. We have no comparable. Movement to the to
the right that succeeded. We've had many movements to
the right, and we came close after World War
One, but We haven't had that experience yet, so
people don't know. You know, here, if you want
people to know that, you tell them the story
of Portugal or Spain or Germany or Italy, and
that's being done. I, I have a dozen uh
emails today about You know, Hitler and how he
came to power, and is it similar, how similar
is it and all that. So, there are people
who know that that's a danger, but you also
have to remember certain particular things. The ruling class
here was not unified in favor of Trump. If
anything, they tilted towards Harris. Because he's a loose
cannon, he's he's uncertain, he introduces odd ideas that
they know are no good for us, so they
don't like him very much. That's one issue. So
he's got that as a serious problem. The military
has basically told him that you can't do what
you wanna do. They told that to Biden too.
Biden has wanted to do things in Ukraine and
in Israel that the American military said we can't
do that. We won't do that. OK, he's st,
he can't do it, um. Then also, Mr. Mr.
Trump is very old and not very well, so
you don't, you know, these others were relatively younger.
He is going to die, probably in the next
4 years, so we will actually be looking at
President Vance. And no one knows what that is
because he was a left of center, then he
became a right of center. He seems to be
somebody who goes wherever the money supports him for
his political career. And so he's unknown. No one
knows what it is, but that's the expectation. So
those are serious problems if you want to establish
a fascism. And finally, Mr. Trump is, he really
is interested in Mr. Trump. He isn't a fascist
uh in the old way. He hasn't always been.
He, he was in favor of abortion a few
years ago. He only changed his opinion to get
the vote of the evangelical Christian, uh, anti-abortion, you
know, the fundamentalist Protestants and the religious Catholics. They,
he wanted that vote, so he said that. He
doesn't care about guns, he doesn't care about any
of this, none of it. It's never been his
whole life, he has no interest in these issues,
none. He wants to make money. His whole life
is getting the money from his father, who had
a real estate business, left him some buildings here
in New York City. And that made him a
millionaire, and that's only, he's never worked, he's never
had to struggle about anything. He makes hotels, he,
he builds hotels, and when they work, he makes
money, and when they don't, he sells them, and
then he builds another, it's just that he has
no, that's why, for example, he attacked Kamala Harris.
As a, I quote now, a socialist Marxist fascist,
he put all the three words together because he
has no idea what they mean, none. He, he
knew that those are bad words in American politics,
so he called his opponent, he couldn't think of
anything else, you know, it's, it's. Europeans have a
much more developed understanding. You really, if you're trying
to understand America, you have to really understand. The
political ignorance that has been cultivated in this culture
throughout the Cold War. The whole world is a
world of good, that's us, and bad, that's everybody
else, everybody. And the worst, Mr. Putin or Xi
Jinping, you know what? Our president, Mr. Biden. Refers
to these people in words like crook, thug. Evil
empire, the language. Listen to the it's a language
of children. It's, it's like a a 4 year
old looking at another 4 year old thing, you
are poo poo. What? That's it? You can't do
better than that. You're an adult. What's the problem?
There's a hug. One leader calls another leader these
names. It's childish. Mhm. You have to understand, and
that's just not, not just our leaders. Our people
have the political understanding that you would shake your
head. Now, I, I'm not a European, I'm an
American, I was born here. On the other hand,
my parents experienced fascism like yours did. So did
my grandparents. Most of my family is dead. They
were killed in either gas chambers or in the
war. So, I know, I grew up in the
same room with my grandmother, who told me the
stories of the bombing. I know the way a
child learns. I have that in my head, I
know. My mother was German, my father was French.
I speak those languages. I spoke those languages before
I learned English. So I really do understand and
have a sense of the European tradition. I'm part
of it. I read French and German newspapers all
the time in order to keep up, but I'm
telling you, this country, is in a very, very,
very dangerous place. Its empire is falling apart. The
bricks is the new. Power in the global economy.
And that power is an enemy of the United
States, and it is outperforming at every turn, and,
and the Americans know it. That's why half of
our ruling class has invested in China. They, it's
very complicated, but the position of the United States,
that's obvious, down. And the people in Europe, the
political leaders, they think the United States is still
on the rise of its empire. No. The rise
was in the 20th century. Up until 2010, 2015.
Now we are going down, and as with every
other empire in the world, Going up is much
more pleasurable than going down. And, and the rest
of the world needs to understand, you're watching the
convulsions inside the United States as it goes down.
So, Doctor Wolf, let's send on that note, we've
reached our time limit. So thank you so much
again for taking the time to come on the
show. It's been a real honor to have you
on and thank you so much for the very
fascinating conversation.
Thank you, Ricardo, and thank you for having these
conversations, cause one of the best ways we can
make some progress is if we all understand what
is going on. So, my thanks to you as
well.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyches Olaf,
Alex Adam Castle, Matthew Whitting Barno, Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Erika Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the
Mari Robert Windegaruyasi Zup Mark Nes called Holbrookfield governor
Michael Stormir, Samuel Andre Francis Forti Agnseroro and Hal
Herzognun Macha Joan Labray and Samuel Corriere, Heinz, Mark
Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus France David Sloan Wilson,
asila dearauurumen Roach Diego London Correa. Yannick Punter Darusmani
Charlotte blinikol Barbara Adamhn Pavlostaevsky nale back medicine, Gary
Galman Sam of Zallirianeioltonin John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward
Hall Edin Bronner, Douglas Fre Franca Bartolotti Gabrielon Scorteus
Slelitsky, Scott Zacharyish Tim Duffyani Smith John Wieman. Daniel
Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgianneau, Luke Lovai Giorgio Theophanous,
Chris Williamson, Peter Wozin, David Williams, Diocosta, Anton Eriksson,
Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, bungalow
atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior, old Erringbo. Sterry Michael
Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Grassyigoren, Jeff McMann, Jake Zu,
Barnabas radix, Mark Campbell, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris
Storry, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brandon,
Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman. George Eoriatis, Valentin Steinman, Perkrolis,
Kate van Goller, Alexander Aubert, Liam Dunaway, BR Masoud
Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular John Nertner, Ursulauddinov, Gregory Hastings, David
Pinsoff Sean Nelson, Mike Levine, and Jos Net. A
special thanks to my producers. These are Webb, Jim,
Frank Lucas Steffinik, Tom Venneden, Bernard Curtis Dixon, Benedict
Muller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, Gian Carlo
Montenegroal Ni Cortiz and Nick Golden, and to my
executive producers Matthew Levender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanivets, and
Rosie. Thank you for all.